QT
The English name of Kuanke is Quant which is the short form of Quantitative. In general, Quantitative is specially talking about Quantitative Analyst. Usually Quants are a group of people who use Mathematics, Statistics & Computer Scinence techniques to solve financial problem such as Pricing, modeling, risk management etc. Traditionally, Quant is sepecifically talking about analysts in Sell side like Investment Banks. As the demand of Quant keep increasing, the term Quant becomes popular in the industry and starting used in both buy side & sell side. 
In the 1990s and early 2000, most Quants are coming from top tier college across the world. Usually, they are holding a PHD degree in fields like Physics, Mathematics. Nowadays, people from all backgrounds wants to become a Quant. Students majoring in Finance, Economic, statistics, even Computer Science. 
As different people merge in to the industry, the role of Quant becomes more diverse. If we categorize Quant by the tool they are using, they can be separated to Q Quant and P Quant, where Q quant use more Mathematics, such as Stocastics Calculus and Diffrecial Equation, while P Quant tends to use more of Statistics and Computer techniques like Machine Learning. If we separate Quants by their Role, there will be Risk Management, Algo Trading Quant, Quant Developer, Model Validation, Quant Trader, even Regulation Quant, Anti-laundary Quant and Prop Quant. 
Graduately, Quant derives a major in Master school called Financial Engineering/Quant Finance/Financial Mathematics. Famous quant program including MSCF from CMU, MCF from Standford, etc. To name a few. Most of graduates from these school join big banks like Goldman Sachs, Morgan Standley, top students from these program would like to join Hedge fund, Quant fund, prop trading firm like Citedal, Bridge Water, jane street, etc, due to their chanllenge job and attractive rewards mechnism. Salary of junior Quant varies from 75K to 150K, depends the company and the roles. Bonus is usually 10%-20% of 1 years salary for investment banking and 0-Unlimited for some hedge fund in Great New York Area. 
About the most recent financial crisis, there is a says about some Chinese Quant Xianglin(David) Li. spread a CDO pricing formula where CDO is mispriced. However, it was widely used among different banks, which in further caused one of the worst financial crisis in human history Sub-morgatge crisis. 
As you can see, quant is assigned great power, making great profit but they also bring in more volatility and unsure risks. This is Kuanke.


宽客(Quant)
宽客是英文Quant的音译，Quant是Quantitative Analyst的简称，直译成中文叫做量化分析师。通常，宽客指的是利用数学，统计学，计算机科技解决金融问题的一群人。其中常见的问题有，衍生品定价，风险管理，量化模型等等。传统意义上来说，宽客尤其指那些在“卖方”，例如投资银行，工作的人。随着华尔街对宽客需求的增加，宽客也越来越受欢迎，宽客的意义也变得更加广泛。现在，宽客会同时存在于“买方”和“卖方”以及各类与金融量化密切相关的行业中。
在上世纪90年代和千禧年初期，大多数宽客是来自全世界顶尖学府的顶尖人才。通常，他们是物理，数学，工程之类的理工科的博士毕业生。现在，越来越多来自不同背景的人们想要成为宽客。其中不乏主修金融，经济，统计学甚至计算机科学的硕士毕业生，也存在着极少数万中无一天才本科生。
随着越来越多的从业者涌入这个行业，宽客的角色也有所改变，总的来说，他们的涉及的领域变得更加多样了，每个宽客也越来越专注各自的领域。按照理论工具来分类的话，可以简单将宽客分为两种。一种是以随机过程，布莱克-舒尔模型等理论数学为基础的Q Quant，另一种是以统计学，计算机科学等实用工具为基础的P Quant。如果按照职能划分的话，宽客们常见的工作内容有风险管理，模型验证，算法交易，模型开发，甚至在监管与反洗钱领域都有宽客的介入。
渐渐的，宽客衍生出一系列的研究生项目，他们常见的名字有金融工程(Financial Engineering)，量化金融(Quantitative Finance)，金融数学(Financial Mathematics)等等。其中比较著名的有来自卡内基梅隆的计算金融项目(MSCF)，斯坦福的计算金融项目等等。多数的项目毕业生会在比如高盛，摩根士丹利等各大投行任职，也有一些顶尖的学生选择加入属于“买方”的对冲基金，自营交易公司，如城堡基金，桥水，Jane Street等等，他们多数都会被“买方”更具挑战性的工作和更有吸引力的工薪待遇所吸引，整个行业的流动性非常大，行业内外的竞争也非常的激烈。在大纽约地区，初入产业的入门级宽客的薪资在75K-150K之间浮动，取决于公司以及岗位的职能。员工的年终奖金通常在年薪的10%-80%左右。对于在对冲基金工作的宽客来说，薪资并不是衡量价值的唯一标准，年终奖金的比例通常是最令人激动的部分。在年收益较好的情况下，超过薪资100%甚至200%的奖金幅度都是以留住人才为目的合理范围。
在2000年，一名在摩根史丹利任职的宽客发表了一篇名为“联结函数的违约相关分析”的论文。华尔街各大银行利用本论文中阐述的关于违约相关性的模型，刺激并推动了一种新型衍生品“信贷违约掉期”（CDS）。八年后以美国次贷危机为首的全球性经济衰退，很可能由这名宽客的模型引起。
如你所见，宽客以其专业性被赋予的极大的权利，他们有能力为企业获取巨大利益，但同时也会为市场带来更多波动性，更多不确定以及难以预知的风险。以这样的方式把握着金融市场的脉搏，这就是宽客。
